[SOUND] Hello, everyone.
My name is Andrey, and in this course,
with my colleague, Mikhail,
we're going to introduce
you to Particle Physics.
If you start worrying already,
what does particle physics have in common
with machine learning, don't panic much.
The topic we have selected will be very
well-related to machine learning and
data science.
I'm team leader of Yandex School of
Data Analysis at LHCb experiment.
Along with scientists from other
universities across the globe,
we are working on particle
physics problems.
Our group focuses on applying machine
learning to those problems and
topics of this course that are pretty
much grounded on our experience.
We are especially fascinated by
the fact that such research field
as particle physics, hunting for answers
to profound mysteries of our Universe,
heavily depends upon machine
learning techniques nowadays.
There are also clues that such
connection goes a bit deeper and
you can draw parallels to other
scientific domains as well, so
the course is structured
in the following way.
At the first part, I will give a mild
introduction into particle physics and
we'll explain basic notions so
you will understand the structure and
the main terms that physicists
use to describe the forces and
particles that comprise
the fundamental level of our Universe.
At the second lecture,
we will explain some of the details,
how particle detectors are designed and
what mechanism can be used to detect
different kinds of tiny particles.
At the third lecture,
we will explain how new physics search
can be mediated through a search for
rare process.
Then, we'll show some examples
of dark matter search
at proposed experiment at CERN.
And at the final, the fifth lecture, we
will show how machine learning techniques
can be applied to design of the new
experiment or upgrade existing detector.
So all of those five lectures will be
a mixture of the main knowledge and
machine learning.
Hopefully, the curriculum will help
you to appreciate how specific
techniques of machine learning can
be used to help improving precision,
accuracy, and speed of data processing
that happens at fundamental physics.
So why are we focusing
on particle physics?
First of all, it faces the most
fundamental problem of our Universe and
understanding of those problems will
explain the mechanism of our world,
so we can appreciate better where we
are and how the place is structured.
Ultimately, this knowledge can enable
people to improve our level of existence
by transferring the knowledge into
technologies that we use on a daily basis.
There are plenty of puzzles
that are still unsolved and
advanced machine learning
can be applied there.
Such exercise does not necessarily
require domain knowledge,
so we hope you will find the theoretical
part not very demanding and
practical part of our course,
engaging and rewarding.
True disclaimer,
that we are not particle physicists, and
particle physics is a subject essentially
much more complex than described here.
We do not guarantee completeness,
accuracy, or
applicability of information therein
to your particle physics adventure.
The sole reason for
these simplifications is to allow for
a more prominent universe picture
to emerge that will help you
to get engaged in the beautiful
journey of our Universe exploration.
Let's start with variety of scales
you can encounter in there.
As you can imagine, there is a fundamental
level at which particle physics works.
There are quarks or
tiny bits of matter that stick together
to form a more significant object
like a proton or a neutron.
As those attach to each other and
atomic nucleus is formed,
then goes a whole atom that
turns into a molecule, and
then to a regular method that
we used to interact with.
Going further, we get into a celestial
kingdom, we encounter astronomic
object like planets, stars,
nebulae, and galaxies.
The observable Universe today is enormous.
It is still a spherical thing with the
radius about 50 billion light years long,
or about 5 to 1026-meter long
if you prefer the metric system.
You may wonder why the scale is so
different for
different object and
what is the reason for such a difference.
So one of the the answers
to this question is
the different forces
mediate different objects.
On this slide,
we show which forces are responsible for
the creation of different
kinds of objects.
It starts with so-called strong force.
It is responsible for dealing with
subatomic objects like baryons,
like protons and neutrons,
or atomic nucleus.
Then, there is electro-weak force,
that is a mixture of electromagnetic and
weak ones.
It deals with a higher scale,
ranging from atom to matter,
and then there is a gravity.
Of course, that is responsible for
creation of much larger objects
that we know from looking at
the sky through the telescopes.
Those are ranging from
asteroids to galaxies.
You can see the magnitude of those
forces differ significantly.
The strong force is the way
stronger than the gravity.
There are 41 orders of magnitude
difference between those two.
These difference make physicists
head spin quite a bit.
We will touch this as
a question in a second,
after introduction of the standard
model of elementary particles.
The standard model describes what Universe
is made of and how it holds together.
It is addressed on two central ideas.
The first one,
all matter is made of particles.
And the second one, that these
particles interact with each other
by exchanging other particles
associated with the fundamental forces.
The essential grains of matter,
fermions, and
the force carriers are bosons, the names
of those two classes refer to their spins.
Fermions have integer values of spin,
whereas bosons have integer values,
I show it on the slide.
Fermions come in two families,
the lepton family has six members.
With electron being
the best known of them,
the quarks family contains six quarks,
the up and
down quarks are found inside protons and
neutrons.
The 12 fermions are the building
blocks of matter.
These particles interact with each
other through fundamental forces.
These, each force comes with one or
more force carriers, strong force,
mediate through gluons and binds
the quarks within protons and neutrons.
The photon is associated with
electromagnetic interaction.
The weak interaction is responsible for
radioactivity.
It comes with Z and W bosons.
Combining elementary particles, allows for
creation of more complicated
forms of matter.
There are rules how quarks can be
connected in more complicated particles,
hadrons.
It is where the Large Hadron Collider
takes its name.
The three quarks combine,
may form a baryon.
For example, proton or neutron, even
number of quarks, like 2 or 4, form a meson.
Until the beginning of this century,
it was thought that
mesons come only in the form of quark and
antiquark pairs, but
in 2007, Belle Collaboration
has discovered tetraquark,
that has been confirmed by
LHCb collaboration in 2014.
The standard model is both
remarkably simple and very powerful.
Complex equations are expressed,
expressing all possible particle
interactions mathematically.
These equation allow theories
to make exact predictions
in nearly every quantity
that has been measured in
particle physics laboratories
over past five decades.
A false right on the predicted value
within experimental error margins.
At this slide, you see a snapshot of
a lowly animation that grasps the spirit
of the standard model by a bunch
of Lego building blocks.
If you have a couple of spare minutes,
I highly recommend having a look at it.
So what are the standard
model shortcomings?
There are things that it does not
explain well or doesn't explain at all.
For example, gravity is not included
in this standard model at all.
And the question, why is gravity so
much weaker than everything else?
The second question is, why masses
of particle differ so massively?
Standard model misses great
deal of the Universe.
It is known that there are five
times more dark matter
that sits in the galaxies around us, and
standard model have no clue what
kind of particle it consists of.
Also, the standard model does not explain
that asymmetry of flows for
matter and antimatter well enough.
We know that there
are a vast amount of matter
existing in the Universe around us,
and almost no sign of antimatter.
So this asymmetry cannot be explained
by current version of standard model.
[SOUND]